# Introduction

## Rest-activity rhythms and cognitive aging
Rest-activity rhythms are circadian-mediated patterns of activity that give rise to natural preferences for when we tend to go to bed, wake from sleep, be most active during the day, and feel inclined to take naps. Older adults frequently experience changes in both sleep and rest-activity patterns, such as increased difficulties with sleep initiation, maintenance, and fragmentation, as well as advanced timing and reduced in circadian rhythms of temperature, melatonin, and several hormones {cite}`mander_sleep_2017`. In terms of rest-activity patterns, healthy older adults demonstrate greater 24-hour rhythm stability, increased intradaily variability and later acrophase, or time of peak activity {cite}`luik_stability_2013, mitchell_variation_2017`. Often these changes may go unrecognized unless accompanied by a clinical sleep impairment, other health conditions, or declines in daytime function.

There are now a number of studies reporting that certain characteristics of rest-activity patterns are associated with adverse health conditions, including cardiovascular disease, depression, cancer, and dementia {cite}`ancoli-israel_role_2003, smagula_systematic_2019`. Even in older adults free of significant disease burden, aspects of rest-activity rhythms are associated with worse executive function {cite}`walsh_weaker_2014` and memory {cite}`luik_associations_2015, oosterman_fragmentation_2009, sherman_hippocampal_2015`. These important aspects of the rest-activity rhythm can broadly be conceptualized as three key features: stability, or the day-to-day consistency of rest-activity patterns; intradaily variability, or the fragmentation of rest-activity patterns within a 24-hour period; and phase, or the timing of the rhythm. Given the link between rest-activity rhythm characteristics and cognitive function in older adulthood, it is important that these rest-activity characteristics can be reliably measured and interpreted to maximize their potential for use as a potential biomarker of age-related cognitive changes.

## Rest-activity rhythm assessment
Actigraphy is a commonly used approach for assessing rest-activity patterns. Actigraphs consist of an accelerometer and a light sensor, and can be worn on the wrist, ankle, or waist. They record the frequency and intensity of movement activity over a period of time. This method provides two key advantages over alternate methods of sleep and activity pattern assessment: (1) it provides objective measurements, which show good correspondence with gold-standard polysomnography (PSG; {cite:t}`sadeh_role_2011`) and often differ from self-report {cite}`matthews_similarities_2018`, and (2) it allows for non-invasive, real-world data acquisition, as opposed to an in-lab study. From the activity count data, algorithms can be applied to derive sleep and activity measures. While PSG remains the gold standard for sleep assessment, it poses logistical and validity challenges for circadian assessment, which necessitates information about rest-activity patterns acquired over multiple days {cite}`smith_use_2018`. There are several common approaches for actigraphic rest-activity rhythm analysis which can be used to convey information about the rhythm's stability, fragmentation, and phase.

### Extended cosinor model
The extended cosinor model {cite}`marler_sigmoidally_2006` uses a non-linear parametric transformation of a traditional cosine curve curve to model actigraphy data. Because activity counts are highly skewed {cite}`di_joint_2019`, activity counts are often first log-transformed and aggregated using the maximum count at a given time resolution before the model is applied. The transformation options include the hill function, the anti-logistic function, and the arctangent function. This method yields five parameters which are reflective of different aspects of the rest-activity rhythm. While this is one of the most popular methods for quantitative rest-activity rhythm analysis, this method is limited in that the model shape is not well-suited to capture diurnal activity patterns and frequent napping, which are common in aging and certain clinical populations.

### Non-parametric methods
Given the limitations of parametric approaches such as the extended cosinor model, some researchers have instead adopted non-parametric measures to describe the various aspects of rest-activity patterns. This approach primarily quantifies the amplitude (relative amplitude, RA), regularity (interdaily stability, IS) and fragmentation (intradaily variability, IV) of the rest-activity rhythm {cite}`van_someren_improving_2007, witting_alterations_1990`.

## Limitations to standard rest-activity rhythm assessment
While a number of studies have now reported that rest-activity rhythm measures are associated with pathological aging and cognitive decline, there is little agreement in the field as to which rest-activity measures best capture these patterns. Studies often report disparate results as to which measures capture the variance in neurocognitive outcomes. Some studies have emphasized importance rhythm stability {cite}`walsh_weaker_2014, tranah_circadian_2011, sherman_hippocampal_2015, mcmahon_rest-activity_2020, luik_associations_2015, rogers-soeder_rest-activity_2018, alfini_associations_2021` whereas others have emphasized intradaily fragmentation {cite}`baillet_activity/rest_2017, oosterman_fragmentation_2009` or phase {cite}`walsh_weaker_2014, tranah_circadian_2011, luik_associations_2015, rogers-soeder_rest-activity_2018`. Not only can these standard measures be calculated using different techniques, the measures themselves are not independent (e.g., rhythm amplitude is reflective of both day-to-day stability and mean activity levels, rhythm amplitude and rhythm minimum (how much movement occurs during the sleep pattern) are correlated, etc.). Therefore, reliance on standard rest-activity rhythm measures may constrain the interpretability and replicability of research findings and limit the information potential of actigraphy data.

Given these limitations, some researchers have used data-driven rest-activity rhythm measures to better capture the patterns in actigraphy data that could be missed by parametric assumptions or pre-defined formulas. {cite:t}`alfini_associations_2021` used functional principal components analysis to decompose preprocessed actigraphy data into three components, and identified component associations with cognitive performance and diagnostic status (mild cognitive impairment vs. healthy control). Components that showed associations with these measures were also correlated with multiple standard rest-activity measures, but, by definition, not correlated with other components. This approach therefore may allow for representation of nuanced activity patterns that integrate features of rhythms which are not detectable through model-based approaches and which demonstrate important associations with key age-related cognitive changes.
